fix(docs): update monitoring docs (#1154)
cloudoperators/greenhouse: docs/architecture/monitoring.md

## Introduction to Observability

> Observability in software and infrastructure is important for operating a complex cloud environment. High-quality observability will enable teams to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability in software and infrastructure is essential for operating a complex cloud environment. High-quality observability will enable teams to:
```

- Detect and troubleshoot issues quickly,
- Maintain performance and reliability,
- Make data-driven improvements.

### Core Signals

> Key pillars of observability are **metrics**, **logs**, and **traces**, each providing unique insights which contributes to a comprehensive view of a system's health.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key pillars of observability are **metrics**, **logs**, and **traces**, each providing unique insights contributing to a comprehensive view of a system's health.
```

#### Metrics
Metrics are numerical data points reporting on a system health over time. Examples of metrics can be CPU usage, memory usage, request latency.

#### Logs
Logs are detailed records of system or application events. These can be in various formats, structured/unstructured, single-/multi-line, written to files/streamed etc. Logs are essential for post-incident analysis and incredibly useful for troubleshooting or improving a system.

#### Traces
Traces follow a request's journey through the system, capturing latency and failures across microservices. Traces are key for understanding dependencies and diagnosing bottlenecks.

### Tools
Common Open Source Tools to capture these signals are:
- **[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io)** is a tool for collecting and querying metrics. It uses a time-series database optimized for real-time data, making it ideal for gathering system health data, enabling alerting, and visualizing trends.
- **[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io)** is a tool for distributed tracing, providing a detailed view of request paths and performance across services.

> - **[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)** was developed as a framework for instrumenting applications and infrastructures to collect metrics, logs and traces. It defines a standard for unifying the processing of all three types of signals. In addition to providing an API and SDKs for multiple programming languages, **OpenTelemetry** also simplifies the integration with backend systems such as Prometheus, OpenSearch and Jaeger.

Author: >  Shouldn't we incorporate this? And then at the very end mention OTel as a combination of all.

I do not understand what you mean. What should be included? And Otel is the last in the list?

> - **[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)** was developed as a framework for instrumenting applications and infrastructures to collect metrics, logs and traces. It defines a standard for unifying the processing of all three types of signals. In addition to providing an API and SDKs for multiple programming languages, **OpenTelemetry** also simplifies the integration with backend systems such as Prometheus, OpenSearch and Jaeger.

Author: You want to remove the OpenSearch section, why?

> - **[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)** was developed as a framework for instrumenting applications and infrastructures to collect metrics, logs and traces. It defines a standard for unifying the processing of all three types of signals. In addition to providing an API and SDKs for multiple programming languages, **OpenTelemetry** also simplifies the integration with backend systems such as Prometheus, OpenSearch and Jaeger.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Timo, making it clear not to confuse that OpenSearch isn’t a tool to collect or forward signals, but rather to store, aggregate, and visualize them. That said, I still think it makes sense to include it in the “Tools” section, since its the tool  how we handle logs via OpenTelemetry and we have a plugin for it. I’d suggest also reflecting it in the architecture diagram for clarity and consistency.

> - **[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)** was developed as a framework for instrumenting applications and infrastructures to collect metrics, logs and traces. It defines a standard for unifying the processing of all three types of signals. In addition to providing an API and SDKs for multiple programming languages, **OpenTelemetry** also simplifies the integration with backend systems such as Prometheus, OpenSearch and Jaeger.

Author: Added OS to the chart. I guess it makes sense to show that part as well as a sink (like already present Perses).

> - **[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io)** was developed as a framework for instrumenting applications and infrastructures to collect metrics, logs and traces. It defines a standard for unifying the processing of all three types of signals. In addition to providing an API and SDKs for multiple programming languages, **OpenTelemetry** also simplifies the integration with backend systems such as Prometheus, OpenSearch and Jaeger.

Author: After some rethinking we will keep opensearch here. We have it now in the diagram and also because it is relevant to the logging.

## Observability in Greenhouse

> Greenhouse provides a suite of *Plugins* which consist of pre-packaged configurations for monitoring and logging tools. These *Plugins* are designed to simplify the setup and configuration of observability components, enabling users to quickly deploy and manage monitoring and logging for their Greenhouse-onboarded Kubernetes clusters.

Author: > subset

I do not like this term. To me it seems to arbitrary (a random subset) of Plugins. If anything the rephrasing would be "A subset of Greenhouse's Plugins consists of pre-packaged...." -- but that seems like a kinda passive sentence.

My intention was to have something like "Greenhouse provides a [curated selection of tools (= "suite")] of pre-packaged....".

> Greenhouse provides a suite of *Plugins* which consist of pre-packaged configurations for monitoring and logging tools. These *Plugins* are designed to simplify the setup and configuration of observability components, enabling users to quickly deploy and manage monitoring and logging for their Greenhouse-onboarded Kubernetes clusters.

Author: > enabling users to quickly deploy and manage monitoring and logging for their Greenhouse-onboarded Kubernetes clusters.

I would maybe rewrite it as:

"It enables users to quickly deploy monitoring an logging solutions (applications?) to their Greenhouse clusters."

Wdyt?

> Greenhouse provides a suite of *Plugins* which consist of pre-packaged configurations for monitoring and logging tools. These *Plugins* are designed to simplify the setup and configuration of observability components, enabling users to quickly deploy and manage monitoring and logging for their Greenhouse-onboarded Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer 3: For the first part:
The way it currently reads to me is that greenhouse is exclusively providing plugins for monitoring and logging, that's why I went with _subset_ in my suggestion. How about this?

> Greenhouse provides a suite of **Plugins**, including pre-packaged configurations for monitoring and logging tools.

For the latter part we can take your suggestion:

> It enables users to quickly deploy monitoring and logging solutions to their Greenhouse clusters.

> Greenhouse provides a suite of *Plugins* which consist of pre-packaged configurations for monitoring and logging tools. These *Plugins* are designed to simplify the setup and configuration of observability components, enabling users to quickly deploy and manage monitoring and logging for their Greenhouse-onboarded Kubernetes clusters.

Author: Resolved through a separate discussion.
